Update SAE ACP (#2)
ARR4N/ACPs: ACPs/194-streaming-asynchronous-execution/README.md

1. A sophisticated DeFi trader runs a highly optimised execution client, locally clearing the transaction queue well in advance of the network—setting the stage for HFT DeFi.
2. A custodial platform filters the queue for only those transactions sent to one of their EOAs, immediately crediting user balances.

## Description

> In standard, synchronous, execution a block is first _proposed_ by a validator. In order for validators to consider the block valid to insert into the consensus process, it is _executed_. After _execution_, the block is _accepted_ by consensus. The act of _accepting_ a block immediately _settles_ all transactions in the block by including the transaction execution results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In all execution models, a block is _proposed_ and then verified by validators before being _accepted_. To assess a block's validity in _synchronous_ execution, its transactions are first _executed_ and only then _accepted_ by consensus. This immediately and implicitly _settles_ all of the block's transactions by including their execution results at the time of _acceptance_.
```

Author: Perhaps we drop "standard" entirely?

Reviewer: updated suggestion

Reviewer 2: I've tightened up the language a bit more.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    I[Proposed] --> E[Executed] --> A[Accepted/Settled]
```

> Under SAE, a block is first _proposed_ by a validator. In order for validators to consider the block valid for consensus, it is verified that _execution_ will later succeed. The block is then _accepted_ by consensus. The act of _accepting_ a block _enqueues_ the block to be _executed_. After the block is _executed_, a following block will reference the execution results and _settle_ all transactions in the _executed_ block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Under SAE, a block is considered valid if all of its transactions can be paid for when eventually _executed_, after which the block is _accepted_ by consensus. The act of _acceptance_ enqueues the block to be _executed_ asynchronously. In the future, some as-yet-unknown later block will reference the execution results and _settle_ all transactions from the _executed_ block.
```

Author: I don't think this reads correctly:

> The act of _acceptance_ enqueues the block to be _executed_ asynchronously and in the future. Some as-yet unknown later block will reference the execution results and _settle_ all transactions from the _executed_ block.

Should it be:

> The act of _acceptance_ enqueues the block to be _executed_ asynchronously. In the future, some as-yet unknown later block will reference the execution results and _settle_ all transactions from the _executed_ block.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, that's much clearer. I've updated the suggestion so you can just commit it.

> Under SAE, a block is first _proposed_ by a validator. In order for validators to consider the block valid to insert into the consensus process, it is verified that later _execution_ will succeed. The block is then _accepted_ by consensus. The act of _accepting_ a block _enqueues_ the block to be _executed_. After the block is _executed_, a following block will reference the execution results and _settle_ all transactions in the _executed_ block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under SAE, a block is first _proposed_ by a validator. In order for validators to consider the block valid for consensus, it is verified that _execution_ will later succeed. The block is then _accepted_ by consensus. The act of _accepting_ a block _enqueues_ the block to be _executed_. After the block is _executed_, a following block will reference the execution results and _settle_ all transactions in the _executed_ block.
```

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    I[Proposed] --> A[Accepted]
    A -->|variable delay| E[Executed]

>     E -->|τ seconds| S[Settled]

Reviewer 2: This assumes that $d = \tau$, which isn't necessarily a requirement. It has nice C-Chain properties in that it allows the execution stream to remain saturated while minimising the queue-DoS bound, but another implementation may want to set $\tau > d$ to more eagerly clear the mempool. I think we should at least define them differently and explain why we set them to be the same value.

Author: Hmmm. I don't define the length of the queue in seconds anymore. I define it only as the back-pressure window $\omega$.

I suppose we could define the minimum lower-bound on $\omega$ and then introduce an additional variable (which we will set to 0) to additionally expand the queue as desired?

tbh, imo, keeping the ACP as simple as possible is probably for the best (since it is explicitly targeting the C-chain rather than describing the mechanism in general)

Reviewer 2: > Hmmm. I don't define the length of the queue in seconds anymore. I define it only as the back-pressure window $\omega$.

$\omega = \tau \cdot R\lambda$ so it's implicit, however:

> tbh, imo, keeping the ACP as simple as possible is probably for the best (since it is explicitly targeting the C-chain rather than describing the mechanism in general)

I agree.

    A -. guarantees .-> S
```

> 

Reviewer: do we think including transaction states in the description either with the block definitions or after the block definitions is worth it?

```
Transaction under standard, synchronous execution:
1. sequenced (by block proposer), meaning it is included in a block
2. then executed (by block proposer to produce a state output which is cached) 
3. then proposed and propagated to other validators in the network as part of consensus protocol 
4. then replicated and executed (by all other validators), checking that the output of execution matches the output produced by the proposer node
5. and finally considered globally accepted by the network so long as it satisfies consensus. At this time the tx in the block is considered canonically executed.

Transactions under SAE:
1. sequenced (by block proposer)
2. then undergoes lightweight verification (by block proposer)
3. then proposed and propagated to other validators in the network as part of consensus protocol
other validators replicate the block verification to confirm block validity, and then vote
4. then considered globally accepted (i.e. guaranteed to be eventually be executed)
5. finally executed (by each validator, including block proposer).
6. and settled and considered canonically executed once the receipt is included in a following block.
```

Author: I don't think we need to define terms that we don't use later in the ACP

Reviewer 2: These terms are really useful for developer docs / FAQs though, so I'm going to leave this unresolved to avoid losing them even if they won't be included in the ACP.

### Block lifecycle

#### Proposing blocks

The validator selection mechanism for block production is unchanged. However, block builders are no longer expected to execute transactions during block building.

> The block builder is expected to include transactions based on the most recently settled state and to apply worst-case bounds on the execution of the ancestor blocks prior to the most recently settled block.

Reviewer: Why do we care about the state of the ancestor block of the most recently settled block? If I have block<sub>settled</sub>, it should be safe to assume I have access to the state of all block<sub>settled - n</sub>. 

Did you mean all block<sub>settled + n</sub> (child blocks that may have been accepted but not yet executed)? or did you mean, "most recently accepted state"?

Author: I mean to convey that: we could have the most recently settled state at height x. We are verifying block at height y (y > x). For all blocks at height x+1, x+2, ... y-1 we care about their transactions for the worst case bound

Reviewer: yes, those are the children of the most recently settled and the parents of the most recently accepted, right?

Author: Yes

> The block builder is expected to include transactions based on the most recently settled state and to apply worst-case bounds on the execution of the ancestor blocks prior to the most recently settled block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The block builder is expected to include transactions by building upon the most recently settled state and to apply worst-case bounds on the execution of the ancestor blocks prior to the most recently settled block.
```

The worst-case bounds enforce minimum balances of sender accounts and the maximum required base fee. The worst-case bounds are described [below](#block-validity-and-building).

> 

Reviewer 2: Why
is
every
sentence
on
a
new
line?

I mean when rendered in Markdown (i.e. you've left a double-`\n`). I'm pro new-line sentences in Markdown and LaTeX to simplify diffs, but not double spacing such that they're rendered as new paragraphs. I'm happy to fix it after merging the PR, but wanted to check that it wasn't for some reason.

Author: I found myself getting lost in the sauce of big paragraphs. Feel free to do whatever you think looks the best. I don't have any strong opinions here.

Reviewer 2: Will do in a follow-up commit after this is merged.

> Prior to adding a proposed block to consensus, all validators MUST verify that the block builder correctly enforced the worst-case bounds while building the block. This guarantees that the block can be executed successfully if it is accepted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to proposing a block for consensus, the proposer MUST verify that the block builder correctly enforced the worst-case bounds while building the block. All validators participating in consensus must replicate the block verification to confirm block validity. This guarantees that the block can be executed successfully if it is accepted.
```

Author: I don't think this is quite right. Only one validator really proposes a block (equivalent to building and gossiping a block)

Reviewer: updated suggestion

Reviewer 2: If we had PBS then this would be more applicable, but currently we can consider the proposer and builder to be the same entity. I don't think we should make this change.

Author: Yeah, this suggestion reads as if the block builder and the proposer are different people.

> [!NOTE]
> The worst-case bounds guarantee does not provide assurance about whether or not a transaction will revert nor whether its computation will run out of gas by reaching the specified limit. The verification only ensures the transaction is capable of paying for the accrued fees.

#### Accepting blocks

> Once a block is marked as accepted by consensus, the block is enqueued in a FIFO execution queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a block is marked as accepted by consensus, the block is put in a FIFO execution queue.
```
queue is redundant

Author: I think the full block is being enqueued. Not really sure what the contents would be referencing

Reviewer: updated, removed mention of contents

#### Executing blocks

> There is a constantly alive block executor whose job is to execute blocks taken off the FIFO execution queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each client runs a block executor in parallel, which constantly executes the blocks from the FIFO queue.
```
is the block executor a sub-service of avalanchego that every node runs? Or is it a centralized service whose results are pushed to all nodes in the network? unclear

Reviewer 2: The latter. I've updated your suggestion a little, removing redundant words and `avalanchego`.

> In addition to executing the blocks, the block executor provides deterministic timestamps for the beginning and end of execution of a block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to executing the blocks, the executor provides deterministic timestamps for the beginning and end of each block's execution.
```

> Time is accordingly measured in two ways by the block executor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Time is measured two ways by the block executor:
```

1. The timestamp included in the block header.

> 2. The amount of gas charged during the execution of blocks.

Reviewer: gas is not a measure of time. Do you mean, "Time is denominated in seconds according to the timestamp of the block header as well as in units per gas charged during execution"? 

I'm not sure i understand the second bullet

Reviewer 2: > gas is not a measure of time

It is, however, a proxy for it and that's what we need to convey.

If the executor is configured to allow $R$ gas per second then $\frac{g}{R}$ has units of seconds. Since $R$ is effectively a constant (let's not get into ACP-176 here), $g$ is a stopwatch. This is like [dimensional analysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dimensional_analysis) in physics.

Exploiting this insight is a core contribution of SAE.

> [!NOTE]
> Execution timestamps are more granular than block header timestamps to allow sub-second block execution times.

> As soon as there is a block available to execute on the execution queue, the block executor starts processing the block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As soon as there is a block available in the execution queue, the block executor starts processing the block.
```

> If the block executor's current timestamp is prior to the current block's timestamp, the block executor's timestamp is advanced to the block's timestamp.

Reviewer: why would the executor have a timestamp that differs from the block header's timestamp?

Reviewer 2: Because of its gas-based stopwatch.

> If the block executor's current timestamp is prior to the current block's timestamp, the block executor's timestamp is advanced to the block's timestamp.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the executor's current timestamp is prior to the current block's timestamp, the executor's timestamp is advanced to match the block's.
Advancing the timestamp in this scenario results in unused gas capacity, reducing the gas _excess_ from which the price is determined.
```

The block is then executed on top of the last executed (not settled) state.

> After executing the block, the block executor advances its timestamp based on the gas usage of the block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After executing the block, the executor advances its timestamp based on the gas usage of the block, also increasing the gas _excess_ for the pricing algorithm.
```

The block's execution time is now timestamped and the block is available to be settled.

#### Settling blocks

> Previously executed blocks are settled by the acceptance of a new block whose timestamp is greater than or equal to the execution time of a prior block plus a constant additional delay.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Already-executed blocks are settled once a following block that includes the results of the executed block is accepted.
The results are included by setting the state root to that of the last executed block and the receipt root to that of a MPT of all receipts since last settlement, possibly from more than one block.
The following block's timestamp is used to determine which blocks to settle—blocks are settled if said timestamp is greater than or equal to the execution time of the executed block plus a constant delay.
```
lmk if this is not what settles a block

Reviewer 2: I've changed your suggestion a little, Meag. Generally agree with it, and wanted to extend it a little. You'll also see that I put new sentences on new lines as that helps with future diffs.

Author: > The following block's timestamp is greater than or equal to the execution time of the executed block plus a constant additional delay. 

Perhaps

> The following block's timestamp is used to determine which blocks to settle.
> Blocks are settled if the following block's timestamp is greater than or equal to the execution time of the executed block plus a constant additional delay.

(or something)

Reviewer 2: I've updated (with some tightening) to match your "perhaps" block. Leaving for you to batch commit so you see what's going in.

> The additional delay amortises any spurious slowdowns the block executor may have encountered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The additional delay amortises any sporadic slowdowns the block executor may have encountered.
```

Author: The whole ACP currently uses the "ise" rather than "ize" suffix. Either is fine (English vs American) but it should be consistent imo

Reviewer 2: -ise 🇦🇺

</div>

ACP-176 provided a mechanism to make $T$ dynamic and set:

$$
\begin{align}
R &= 2 \cdot T \\
K &= 87 \cdot T
\end{align}
$$

The _excess_ actual consumption $x \ge 0$ beyond the target $T$ is tracked via numerical integration and used to calculate the gas price as:

$$M \cdot \exp\left(\frac{x}{K}\right)$$

### Gas charged

We introduce $g_L$, $g_U$, and $g_C$ as the gas _limit_, _used_, and _charged_ per transaction, respectively. We define

$$
g_C := \max\left(g_U, \frac{g_L}{\lambda}\right)
$$

> where $\lambda$ enforces a lower bound on the gas charged based on the gas limit.

Reviewer: what is lambda? a constant or a dynamic value?

Author: It is a constant. At the end of the ACP it is suggested to be set equal to 2.

> [!NOTE]

> > $\dfrac{g_L}{\lambda}$ is rounded up by actually calculating $\dfrac{g_L + \lambda - 1}{\lambda}$

Reviewer: cute

> In all cases that execution used to refer to gas usage, we will from now on consider gas charged. For example, the gas excess $x$ will be modified by $g_C$ rather than $g_U$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In all previous instances where execution referenced gas used, from now on, we will reference gas charged. For example, the gas excess $x$ will be modified by $g_C$ rather than $g_U$.
```

### Queue size

> The constant time delay between execution and settlement is defined as $\tau$ seconds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The constant time delay between block execution and settlement is defined as $\tau$ seconds.
```

The maximum allowed size of the execution queue is defined as:

$$
\omega ~:= R \cdot \tau \cdot \lambda
$$

> Any block that could cause the total sum of gas limits for transactions in the execution queue to exceed $\omega$ MUST be considered invalid.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any block that would cause the total sum of gas limits for transactions in the execution queue to exceed $\omega$ MUST be considered invalid.
```

Author: I used "could" here to try to convey that this check isn't referring to the local state of the executor. But instead the global worst-case execution assumption.

### Block executor

> During the activation of SAE, the block executor's timestamp, $t_e$, is initialised to the timestamp of the last accepted block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During the activation of SAE, the block executor's timestamp $t_e$ is initialised to the timestamp of the last accepted block.
```

Although the commas are generally the correct way to punctuate this sentence, they don't play nicely with LaTeX subscripts.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2121a4c0-feae-41ea-917d-6c620f30bafe)

> Prior to executing a block which includes timestamp $t_b$, the executor's timestamp and excess is updated:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prior to executing a block with timestamp $t_b$, the executor's timestamp and excess is updated:
```

$$
\begin{align}
\Delta{t} &~:= \max\left(t_e, t_b\right) - t_e \\
t_e &~:= t_e + \Delta{t} \\
x &~:= \max\left(x - T \cdot \Delta{t}, 0\right) \\
\end{align}
$$

> The block is then executed with the gas price calculated by the current value of $x$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The block is then executed with the gas price calculated from the current value of $x$.
```

> After executing a block which was charged $g_C$ gas, the executor's timestamp and excess is updated:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After executing a block that charged $g_C$ gas in total, the executor's timestamp and excess is updated:
```

Adding "in total" is just for completeness, while the change from "which" to "that" is because being pedantic in technical writing is something I care about. _That_ introduces a restriction on the noun (something essential), while _which_ introduces a non-restrictive bit of extra information—if we were to remove the charge of $g_C$ then the sentence would fundamentally change, so we use _that_.

I don't typically care about prescriptive rules and will happily split an infinitive or do other things to annoy English teachers. This pedantry, however, is about conveying precise meaning.

Author: I ain't reading all that. I'm happy for u tho. Or sorry that happened.

$$
\begin{align}
\Delta{t} &~:= \frac{g_C}{R} \\
t_e &~:= t_e + \Delta{t} \\
x &~:= x + \Delta{t} \cdot (R - T) \\
\end{align}
$$

> [!NOTE]

> > The update rule here assumes that $t_e$ is a timestamp that can track the passage of time both by gas and by wall-clock time. $\frac{g_C}{R}$ MUST NOT be simply rounded. Rather, the gas accumulation should be left as a fraction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The update rule here assumes that $t_e$ is a timestamp that tracks the passage of time both by gas and by wall-clock time. $\frac{g_C}{R}$ MUST NOT be simply rounded. Rather, the gas accumulation MUST be left as a fraction.
```

$t_e$ is now this block's execution timestamp.

### Handling gas target changes

> When a block is produced which modifies $T$, both the consensus thread and the execution thread will update to the modified $T$ after their own handling of the block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a block is produced that modifies $T$, both the consensus thread and the execution thread will update to the modified $T$ after their own handling of the block.
```

Also, why _after_? Is that for simplicity, or is it just in keeping with the current approach from ACP-176?

Author: It was picked for simplicity in ACP-176, and I think it is still the most simple design. I would have to look back into the code tbh, but I remember avoiding to need to have access to grand-parent blocks during some codepaths by applying the change after the block.

It also makes it so that block builders can't (are less likely to) act selfishly. (If they don't want the block sizes to increase but will increase their own block sizes to include more transactions, then we get into some weird situations).

For example, restrictions of the queue size MUST be calculated based on the parent block's $T$.

Similarly, the time spent executing a block MUST be calculated based on the parent block's $T$.

### Block settlement

> For a _proposed_ block which includes timestamp $t_b$, all ancestors whose execution timestamp $t_e$ is $t_e + \tau \leq t_b$ are considered settled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a _proposed_ block that includes timestamp $t_b$, all ancestors whose execution timestamp $t_e$ is $t_e \leq t_b - \tau$ are considered settled.
Note that $t_e$ is not an integer as it tracks fractional seconds with gas consumption, which is not the case for $t_b$.
```

Author: In the code, I would get nervous about underflow, but for the spec it's fine 😉

> The _proposed_ block must include the `stateRoot` produced by the execution of the most recently settled block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The _proposed_ block MUST include the `stateRoot` produced by the execution of the most recently settled block.
```

> For any _newly_ settled blocks, the _proposed_ block must include all execution artifacts:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For any _newly_ settled blocks, the _proposed_ block MUST include all execution artifacts:
```

- `receiptsRoot`
- `logsBloom`
- `gasUsed`

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

The receipts root MUST be computed as defined in [EIP-2718](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2718) except that the tree MUST be built from the concatenation of receipts from all blocks being settled.

```

Author: from all newly settled blocks.
?

Reviewer 2: Changed to "from all blocks being settled". Yeah, my original wording was terrible.

> [!NOTE]

> > If the block executor has fallen behind, the node may not be able to determine precisely which ancestors should be considered settled. If this occurs, validators MUST allow the block executor to catch up prior to deciding the block's validity.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to say something similar about block proposers wishing to propose a block at a given timestamp? It's implicit in the validation logic, but is it necessary to call it out?

Author: Your call

Reviewer 2: Let's leave it as is. Adding more might be explicit but could also cause confusion if someone things they may be different. Since `Block.Verify()` always enforces `vm.BuildBLock()`, this is safe IMO. Resolving.

### Block validity and building

After determining which blocks to settle, all remaining ancestors of the new block must be inspected to determine the worst-case bounds on $x$ and account balances. Account nonces are able to be known immediately.

The worst-case bound on $x$ can be calculated by following the block executor update rules using $g_L$ rather than $g_C$.

The worst-case bound on account balances can be calculated by charging the worst-case gas cost to the sender of a transaction along with deducting the value of the transaction from the sender's account balance.

> The `baseFeePerGas` field must be populated to the gas price based on the worst-case bound on $x$ at the start of block execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `baseFeePerGas` field MUST be populated with the gas price based on the worst-case bound on $x$ at the start of block execution.
```

Interesting. This could be problematic when later returning an executed block from the API as the actual charge will differ. I think we should consider adding a new header field for `estimatedBaseFeePerGas` (or similar) and leaving `baseFeePerGas` as zero for consensus, only populating it when returned by APIs.

I know that adding an extra field is a decision that shouldn't be taken lightly, but it's definitely worth considering the tradeoff. From an engineering perspective it's now easy with libevm's RLP-override capability.

Author: I felt like we had two options here:
1. `baseFeePerGas` is the gasPrice of the most recently settled block
2. `baseFeePerGas` is the worst-case gasPrice bound of the current block

The second had the following nice properties:
- All transactions in the block will have a baseFee >= the baseFee in the header
- Some (many) wallets use the latest block's baseFee as a fee estimator

If we wanted to override the API results, I think we can consider that in the appendix... This might be a good question to bring up on the community call.

Reviewer 2: > All transactions in the block will have a baseFee >= the baseFee in the header

Do you mean `<=`?

The first has an undesirable property of not applying to all the transactions being settled.

> If we wanted to override the API results, I think we can consider that in the appendix... This might be a good question to bring up on the community call.

Agreed so leaving unresolved to remind us.

Author: Do you mean <=?

The will be _charged_ a baseFee <= the baseFee in the block. But the transactions are enforced to specify internally a baseFee >= the baseFee in the block.

### Configuration Parameters

As noted above, SAE depends on the values of $\tau$ and $\lambda$ to be set as parameters and the value of $\omega$ is derived from $T$. 

Parameters to specify for the C-Chain are:

> <div align="center">

Reviewer 2: ![You make me sad](https://media1.tenor.com/m/3I69m1TmFwoAAAAC/monty-python-you-make-me-sad.gif)

Author: 🫡

| Parameter | Description | C-Chain Configuration|
| - | - | - |

> | $\tau$ | duration between execution and settlement | $5s$ |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| $d$ | duration between execution and settlement | $5s$ |
| $\tau$ | TODO | $5s$ |
```

As per earlier comment decoupling the _definitions_ of $d$ and $\tau$.

Author: See above comment about $\omega$.

### Worst-case transaction validity

To avoid a DoS vulnerability on execution, we require an upper bound on transaction gas cost (i.e. amount $\times$ price) beyond the regular requirements for transaction validity (e.g. nonce, signature, etc.). We therefore introduced "worst-case cost" validity.

> We can prove that, for every transaction, assuming the usage of their full gas limit during execution results in the greatest possible:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can prove that if every transaction were to use its full gas limit this would result in the greatest possible:
```

The wording with "assuming" immediately after a comma led me to think it was going to be an aside (as if in parentheses) and not the actual cause of the upper bounds.

Author: Counter offer:

We can prove that every transaction using its full gas limit results in the greatest possible:

Now that I'm reading it I kind of don't like the word "assuming" in a proof (unless we are trying to do a proof of contradiction).

Reviewer 2: > Now that I'm reading it I kind of don't like the word "assuming" in a proof (unless we are trying to do a proof of contradiction).

I agree. I've updated to use a hypothetical (subjunctive tense? 🤷 ) instead as this is what we really mean.

1. Consumption of gas units (by definition of the gas limit); and
2. Gas excess $x$ (and therefore gas price) at the time of execution.

For a queue of blocks $Q = \\{i\\}_ {i \ge 0}$ the gas excess $x_j$ immediately prior to execution of block $j \in Q$ is a monotonic, non-decreasing function of the gas usage of all preceding blocks in the queue; i.e. $x_j~:=~f(\\{g_i\\}_{i<j})$.

To see this, consider block $0 \le k<j$ consuming gas $g_k$.
A decrease in $g_k$ reduces the immediate increase of $x$.

> Furthermore, this lowered consumption can only further reduce $x$ at the start of executing the next block. Hence any decrease of $x$ is $\ge$ predicted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Furthermore, this lowered consumption might further reduce $x$ at the start of executing the next block if $t^k_e < t^{k+1}_b$ and therefore $\Delta t > 0$.
Hence any decrease of $x$ is $\ge$ predicted.
```

The phrase "can only further" suggests that it's guaranteed. It also wasn't clear why it might happen.

Author: I think it is guaranteed, but 🤷

The excess, and hence gas price, for every later block $x_{i>k}$ is therefore reduced:

$$
\downarrow g_k \implies
\begin{cases}
    \downarrow \frac{g}{R} \cdot (R - T) \\

>     \downarrow \frac{g}{R}

Reviewer 2: I agree with the change to $R$ and $T$ instead of $p$ (and actually did that in the implementation) but it's now not as clear that these two scenarios correspond to the increase and decrease in excess, respectively.

We should keep the arrows and find a better way to summarise the reduction:

$$
\begin{cases}
\downarrow \Delta^+x = \frac{g}{R} \cdot (R - T) \\
\uparrow \Delta^-x = ?
\end{cases}
$$

Reviewer 2: Resolving this to replace with an actual suggestion.

We can prove that, for every transaction, assuming the usage of their full gas limit during execution results in the greatest possible:

1. Consumption of gas units (by definition of the gas limit); and
2. Gas excess $x$ (and therefore gas price) at the time of execution.

For a queue of blocks $Q = \\{i\\}_ {i \ge 0}$ the gas excess $x_j$ immediately prior to execution of block $j \in Q$ is a monotonic, non-decreasing function of the gas usage of all preceding blocks in the queue; i.e. $x_j~:=~f(\\{g_i\\}_{i<j})$.

To see this, consider block $0 \le k<j$ consuming gas $g_k$.
A decrease in $g_k$ reduces the immediate increase of $x$.
Furthermore, this lowered consumption might further reduce $x$ at the start of executing the next block if $t^k_e < t^{k+1}_b$ and therefore $\Delta t > 0$.
Hence any decrease of $x$ is $\ge$ predicted.
The excess, and hence gas price, for every later block $x_{i>k}$ is therefore reduced:

$$
\downarrow g_k \implies
\begin{cases}

>     \downarrow \frac{g}{R} \cdot (R - T) \\
>     \downarrow \frac{g}{R}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    \downarrow \Delta^+x \propto g_k \\
    \uparrow \Delta^-x \propto R-g_k
```

$$
\begin{cases}
    \downarrow \Delta^+x \propto g_k \\
    \uparrow \Delta^-x \propto R-g_k
\end{cases}
$$

I think $\propto$ conveys the message even if not 100% correct in the excess-reduction case.

### Queue DoS protection

Worst-case cost validity only protects against DoS at the point of execution but leaves the queue vulnerable to high-limit, low-usage transactions.

> For example, a malicious user could send a transfer-only transaction (21k gas) with a limit set consume the block's full gas limit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, a malicious user could send a transfer-only transaction (21k gas) with a limit set to consume the block's full gas limit.
```

Although they would have to have sufficient funds to theoretically pay for all the reserved gas, they would never actually be charged this amount. Pushing a sufficient number of such transactions to the queue would artificially inflate the worst-case cost of other users.

Therefore, the gas charged was modified from being equal to the gas usage to the above $g_C := \max\left(g_U, \frac{g_L}{\lambda}\right)$

> Gas limits are typically set higher than expected gas used to allow for a buffer should gas estimates be imprecise. So $\lambda$ should not be set to $1$. However, setting $\lambda$ to $\infty$ would allow users to fill the queue without paying fees.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The gas limit is typically set higher than the predicted gas consumption to allow for a buffer should the prediction be imprecise.
This precludes setting $\lambda := 1$.
Conversely, setting $\lambda := \infty$ would allow users to attack the queue with high-limit, low-consumption transactions.
```

"gas used" as a noun phrase should be "gas usage" or "gas consumption" otherwise it's ambiguous (might be a past-tense verb) until reaching later in the sentence.

Author: Perhaps:

The gas limit is typically set higher than the predicted gas consumption to allow for a buffer should the prediction be imprecise.
This precludes setting $\lambda := 1$.
Conversely, setting $\lambda$ to $\infty$ would allow users to fill the queue without paying fees.

Reviewer 2: Updated to almost exactly that. The last sentence wasn't technically correct because they'd still pay $g_U$.

> Setting $\lambda ~:= 2$ allows for a 100% buffer on gas usage estimates without penalising the sender, while still disincentivising falsely high limits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Setting $\lambda ~:= 2$ allows for a 100% buffer on gas-usage estimates without penalising the sender, while still disincentivising falsely high limits.
```

#### Upper bound on queue DoS

> With $R$ (gas capacity per second) for rate and $g_C$ (gas charged) as already defined.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Recall $R$ (gas capacity per second) for rate and $g_C$ (gas charged) as already defined.
```

> [!TIP]
> Although $D$ shadows a variable in ACP-176, that one is very different to anything here so there won't be confusion.

Recall that the proportionality of capacity per second and target gas per second ($R = 2 \cdot T$) results in increasing excess such that

$$
x := x + \frac{g}{2}
$$

> Since we limit the size of the queue to $\omega$, we can derive an upper bound on the difference in the changes to worst-case and actual gas excess:

Author: We should probably add an additional section around how the size of the queue ensures that the block executor is not constrained by the queue size (this will also likely change the maximum size of the queue, as currently the block executor _can_ be bottlenecked by the queue)

Author: Will leave that as a followup

Reviewer 2: > currently the block executor _can_ be bottlenecked by the queue

How so? When $\tau \ge d$ and under full load, there is guaranteed to be at $d$ seconds' worth of chargeable gas in the queue because $\frac{\omega}{\lambda} = R\tau \ge Rd$, which is the exact execution capacity.

Author: The maximum size of the queue needs to be increased by the maximum size of the block (because gas isn't continuously drained from the queue, it is removed block-by-block)

> [!TIP]
> Although $D$ shadows a variable in ACP-176, that one is very different to anything here so there won't be confusion.

Recall that the increasing excess occurs such that

$$
x := x + g \cdot \frac{(R - T)}{R}
$$

> Since we limit the size of the queue to $\omega$, we can derive an upper bound on the difference in the changes to worst-case and actual gas excess:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since we limit the size of the queue to $\omega$, we can derive an upper bound on the difference in the changes to worst-case and actual gas excess caused by the transactions in the queue:
```

&= \exp \left( \frac{T \cdot \tau \cdot (\lambda-1)}{87 \cdot T} \right)\\
&= \exp \left( \frac{\tau \cdot (\lambda-1)}{87} \right)\\
\end{align}
$$

Therefore, for the values suggested by this ACP:

$$
\begin{align}
D &\le \exp \left( \frac{5 \cdot (2 - 1)}{87} \right)\\
&= \exp \left( \frac{5}{87} \right)\\
&\simeq 1.06\\
\end{align}
$$

In summary, Mallory can require users to increase their gas price by at most ~6%. In practice, the gas price often fluctuates more than 6% on a regular basis. Therefore, this does not appear to be a significant attack vector.

However, any deviation that dislodges the gas price bidding mechanism from a true bidding mechanism is of note.

## Appendix

### JSON RPC methods

Although asynchronous execution decouples the transactions and receipts recorded by a specific block, APIs MUST NOT alter their behavior to mirror this.
In particular, the API method `eth_getBlockReceipts` MUST return the receipts corresponding to the block's transactions, not the receipts settled in the block.

#### Named blocks

The Ethereum Mainnet APIs allow for retrieving blocks by named parameters that the API server resolves based on their consensus mechanism.

> Other than the _earliest_ (genesis) named block, which MUST be interpreted in the same manner, all other named blocks are mapped to SAE in terms of the execution status of blocks and MUST be interpreted as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other than the _earliest_ (genesis) named block, which MUST be interpreted in the same manner, all other named blocks are mapped to SAE in terms of the _execution_ status of blocks and MUST be interpreted as follows:
```

 * _pending_: the most recently _accepted_ block;
 * _latest_: the block that was most recently _executed_;
 * _safe_ and _finalized_: the block that was most recently _settled_.

> [!NOTE]
> The finality guarantees of Snowman consensus remove any distinction between _safe_ and _finalized_. 
> Furthermore, the _latest_ block is not at risk of re-org, only of a negligible risk of data corruption local to the API node.

> ### Streaming vs regular asynchronous pipelining

Reviewer 2: This diagram is no longer relevant as it applied to the per-second chunking approach.
